Data Transfer Protocol update (#1032)
filecoin-project/specs: content/systems/filecoin_files/data_transfer/_index.md

- **Transporter**:  Once a request is negotiated and validated, the actual transfer is managed by a transporter on both sides. The transporter is part of the data transfer module but is isolated from the negotiation process. It has access to an underlying verifiable transport protocol and uses it to send data and track progress.
- **Subscriber**: An external component that monitors progress of a data transfer by subscribing to data transfer events, such as progress or completion.
- **GraphSync**: The default underlying transport protocol used by the Transporter. The full graphsync specification can be found [here](https://github.com/ipld/specs/blob/master/block-layer/graphsync/graphsync.md)

## Request Phases

There are two basic phases to any data transfer:

1. Negotiation: the requestor and responder agree to the transfer by validating it with the data transfer voucher.
2. Transfer: once the negotiation phase is complete, the data is actually transferred. The default protocol used to do the transfer is Graphsync.

Note that the Negotiation and Transfer stages can occur in separate round trips,

> or potentially the same round trip, where the requesting party implicitly agrees by sending the request, and the responding party can agree and immediately send or receive data. Whether the process is taking place in a single or multiple round-trips depends in part on whether the request is a push request (storage deal) or a pull request (retrieval deal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or potentially the same round trip, where the requesting party implicitly agrees by sending the request, and the responding party can agree and immediately send or receive data. Whether the process is taking place in a single or multiple round-trips depends in part on whether the request is a push request (storage deal) or a pull request (retrieval deal), and on whether the data transfer negotiation process is able to piggy back on the underlying transport mechanism. 
```

> 

Reviewer: Would add:

```suggestion
In the case of GraphSync as transport mechanism, data transfer requests can piggy back as an extension to the GraphSync protocol using [GraphSync's built-in extensibility](https://github.com/ipld/specs/blob/master/block-layer/graphsync/graphsync.md#extensions). So, only a single round trip is required for Pull Requests. However, because Graphsync is a request/response protocol with no direct support for `push` type requests, in the Push case, negotiation happens in a seperate request over data transfer's own libp2p protocol `/fil/datatransfer/1.0.0`. Other future transport mechinisms might handle both Push and Pull, either, or neither as a single round trip.

> In particular, the data transfer module does the decoding of the message i.e., gets the deal out of the voucher and delivers it to the request validators to check if the deal included is one that the recipient has agreed to before. This is primarily the case for push requests (storage deals). In the case of pull requests (retrieval deals) the request includes the proposal for the retrieval deal itself. In this case, everything is done at once as a single round-trip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon receiving a data transfer request, the data transfer module does the decoding the voucher and delivers it to the request validators. In storage deals, the request validator checks if the deal included is one that the recipient has agreed to before. For retrieval deals the request includes the proposal for the retrieval deal itself. As long as request validator accepts the deal proposal, everything is done at once as a single round-trip.
```

{{<svg src="push-flow.mmd.svg" title="Data Transfer - Push Flow">}}

1. A requestor initiates a Push transfer when it wants to send data to another party.
2. The requestors' data transfer module will send a push request to the responder along with the data transfer voucher.
3. The responder's data transfer module validates the data transfer request via the Validator provided as a dependency by the responder.
4. The responder's data transfer module initiates the transfer by making a GraphSync request.
5. The requestor receives the GraphSync request, verifies that it recognises the data transfer and begins sending data.
6. The responder receives data and can produce an indication of progress.
7. The responder completes receiving data, and notifies any listeners.

The push flow is ideal for storage deals, where the client initiates the data transfer straightaway

> once it verifies the deal is signed and on chain.

Reviewer: Eek not sure how this misunderstanding happened, but data transfer happens BEFORE the deal is on chain.

```suggestion
once the provider indicates their intent to accept and publish the client's deal proposal.
```
